---
layout: default
title: Publications
---

# Superfluid dynamics in neutron stars

My PhD thesis is entitled *Superfluid dynamics in neutron stars*. It was conducted under the supervision of Prof. Nicolas Chamel (I.A.A. and BRU-ULB, Université Libre de Bruxelles). This work was financially supported by the Fonds de la Recherche Scientifique (Belgium) under Grants No. PDR T.004320. The jury was composed of Michel Tytgat (President), Wouter Ryssens (Examiner), Anthea Francesca Fantina (Examiner), and Piotr Magierski (Examiner), as well as my supervisor Nicolas Chamel.

- 📘 The manuscript is accessible [**here**](https://difusion.ulb.ac.be/vufind/Record/ULB-DIPOT:oai:dipot.ulb.ac.be:2013/374037/Holdings).
- The private defense took place on April 29, 2024 at Université Libre de Bruxelles, in the sole presence of the jury.<br>
  🖥️ [**Slides** (PDF)](/assets/Slides_private.pdf).
- The public defense (intended to be a less technical and more accessible presentation) took place at Université Libre de Bruxelles (Forum E, Plaine Campus) on Tuesday, May 21, 2024 at 2 pm.<br>
  🖥️ [**Slides** (PDF)](/assets/Slides_public.pdf).

## Abstract

  Born from gravitational-core collapse supernovae, neutron stars provide a unique opportunity to explore matter under extreme conditions not reproducible on Earth. In particular, neutron stars contain nuclear superfluids whose presence is supported by observations of pulsar frequency glitches, rapid decline in luminosity of the Cassiopeia A remnant and crust cooling of neutron stars in low-mass X-ray binaries. In this work, the influence of temperature and currents in hot neutron-proton
superfluid mixtures is studied within the nuclear energy-density functional theory: numerical computations using the Brussels-Montreal functionals are performed and the accuracy of several approximations is assessed. The complex superfluid dynamics are investigated and clarified.  The disappearance of superfluidity is also investigated and reveals the presence of a dynamical *gapless* state, characterized by the appearance of a normal fluid (whose properties are investigated) which is found to affect considerably the neutron specific heat and, thus, the thermal properties of neutron stars. Implications for the crust cooling of neutron stars in low-mass X-ray binaries are discussed. Focusing on two particular cases, for which the interpretation of their cooling has been challenged, cooling simulations allowing for neutrons in gapless state are performed. The results suggest that the gapless state plays a key role and reconciles astrophysical observations with microscopic theories of superfluidity. Implications of gapless superfluidity to neutron vortex dynamics are discussed and predictions, that could be tested by future observations, are also made.

### Keywords

Neutron stars, Ultracold quantum gases, Nuclear astrophysics, Energy-density functional theory, Superfluidity, Entrainment effects, Superfluid hydrodynamics, Pairing gap, Gapless superfluidity, Soft X-ray transients, Neutron star cooling, Pulsar glitches

## Summary 

-- IN CONSTRUCTION -- 

  Neutron stars are born from the gravitational-core collapse of massive stars during supernovae. These stars, with masses of the order of that of the Sun but with radii of only about 10 kilometers, are extremely dense and exotic. Initially hot, with temperatures as high as 10<sup>11</sup>−10<sup>12</sup> K, these compact stars rapidly cool down within days to 10<sup>9</sup> K. This sharp decline of temperature thus allows for quantum phase transitions which are not observed in other
celestial bodies. Similar to electrons in terrestrial superconductors, free neutrons and protons in the inner regions of mature neutron stars are predicted
to form Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) condensates of <sup>1</sup>S<sub>0</sub> Cooper pairs at temperatures below 10<sup>10</sup> K, leading to the emergence of neutron and proton superfluid phases. Superfluidity in neutron stars was predicted and studied theoretically years before the discovery of neutron stars and has found strong support from radio-timing of sudden spin-up (also called frequency "glitches") in numerous pulsars, which can be interpreted as global dynamical redistributions of angular momenta between neutron and proton superfluids. More recently, neutron star superfluidity has also been corroborated by the rapid luminosity decline of the neutron star located at the center of the Cassiopeia A supernova remnant and by the crust cooling of neutron stars located in low-mass X-ray binaries.

  Although many studies have been devoted to pulsar glitches, they often neglect non-dissipative couplings between neutrons and protons. These dynamical couplings, called "entrainment effects", are of the same kind as those discussed in the context of superfluid <sup>4</sup>He-<sup>3</sup>He mixtures and constitute key microscopic ingredients for modeling neutron star dynamics and oscillations. These mutual entrainment effects have been previously estimated, but within phenomenological frameworks where the equation of state, the critical temperatures for superfluidity, and the composition all need to be provided by a more microscopic theory. On the other hand, studies of neutron star cooling also neglect entrainment effects between neutron and proton superfluids. Worse still, these cooling studies assume static superfluids, ignoring superfluid dynamics that are crucial for the interpretation of pulsar glitches and that
naturally arise in the recycling scenario of low-mass X-ray binaries, where the neutron star accretes both mass and angular momentum. These limitations have led to discrepancies, such as the fine-tuning of neutron superfluid properties required to explain observations in some low-mass X-ray binary systems — results that often contradict microscopic calculations. The interplay between thermal and dynamical aspects of neutron star superfluidity has not been adequately emphasized in the context of neutron star cooling. This work attempts to bridge this gap by studying both aspects. The dynamical effects are introduced in a parametrized form derived from investigations of nuclear matter within the self-consistent Nuclear Energy-Density Functional Theory (NEDFT) framework.

  The first contribution of this work is the microscopic calculation, within the framework of NEDFT, of entrainment effects in neutron-proton superfluid mixtures as found in neutron star cores. The evolution equations of NEDFT were solved analytically, yielding to exact expressions for the entrainment couplings. The different velocity fields were also clarified: the velocities governing the mass transport of neutrons and protons were formally derived and shown to generally differ from the so-called ‘superfluid velocities’ introduced in the condensed-matter physics literature. These calculations were particularly challenging due to the complexities arising from the nonlinear nature of the self-consistent time-dependent Hartree-Fock Bogoliubov (TDHFB) equations which govern the NEDFT framework.

  Motivated by astrophysical applications, entrainment couplings, consistent with chemical potentials and order parameters characterizing neutron and proton superfluidity, were evaluated numerically and systematically across the range of temperatures and densities found in neutron star cores. For this purpose, highly calibrated Brussels-Montreal energy-density functionals were adopted. Developed at the Astronomy and Astrophysics Institute (Université Libre de Bruxelles), these functionals have been fitted to nearly all nuclear masses and constrained to reproduce a realistic neutron-matter equation of state. These functionals have also been used to compute unified equations of state of neutron stars, treating all regions in a thermodynamically consistent manner. These equations of state were also shown to match with various astrophysical observations, including observations from NASA's NICER X-ray detector and the LIGO-Virgo gravitational-wave interferometers. The reliability of various approximations was also assessed. These numerical results represent the second contribution and can be found in the European CompOSE database. These results provide the first fully consistent microscopic inputs for modeling superfluid neutron stars. 

  Based on these previous studies, critical conditions for the destruction of nuclear superfluidity were investigated. In particular, it was shown that the critical temperature follows the same BCS scaling relation as in conventional terrestrial superconductors. This result was far from obvious, as many neutron star cooling studies had tacitly assumed the validity of this scaling relation for strongly interacting nuclear systems. In this study, the influence of superfluid currents was examined more closely and the existence of a dynamical nuclear superfluid state (called *gapless state*) — where superfluidity remains but with nucleons behaving like a normal fluid — was identified. Such a hybrid state is consistent with and may provide a plausible explanation for the recent puzzling observations of the pulsar PSR B0540-69 which suggest ‘‘a partial evaporation of the superfluid component’’. This evaporation of the superfluid component, resulting from the gapless state, was calculated both analytically and numerically, for arbitrary neutron-proton superfluid mixtures. These findings are important for modeling neutron star dynamics. The strong impact of the gapless superfluid state on specific heat was also studied: results suggest that this dynamical state has significant implications for the thermal properties of neutron stars.

  Possible astrophysical manifestations of gapless superfluidity were then
explored in the cooling of transiently accreting neutron stars in low-mass X-ray binaries. Some of these systems had been found to challenge the current understanding within the standard cooling model which ignores the influence of superfluid currents thus predicting too fast a thermal relaxation of the neutron star. However, the accretion of matter from its companion star can spin up the neutron star and generate finite superfluid currents. The final part of this work showed that, under these conditions, the neutron superfluid can enter the gapless state. In this state, the thermal relaxation of the neutron star is delayed and the puzzling late-time cooling observations can be naturally explained in agreement with microscopic calculations of neutron superfluidity. This constitutes the major achievement of this work. Extensive numerical cooling simulations were performed and the uncertainties in the fitting parameters were assessed through a Markov-Chain Monte Carlo approach. Results from additional cooling simulations, varying the composition of the atmosphere, the accretion rate and the global structure of the neutron star and predictions (which could be tested by further cooling observations) were also made. Potential ways to further improve this thermal cooling model including superfluid dynamics were also thoroughly discussed. This gapless state could also be relevant for the cooling of other promising sources (which were mentioned in this work as potential subjects for future studies) and may also leave imprints on other phenomena.
